---
title: Insert title here
key: e5062469416bc488b211e4242ec1b53a

---
## Using Partitions

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "94f4bd32e3"
```

`@lower_third`
name: Name Surname
title: Instructor


`@script`
We just learned about different database storage methods. Now let's now dive into some of the optimization techniques used with row storage, starting with partitions.


---
## What is Partitioning

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "db456a42e5"
```

`@part1`
**What is Partitioning?**
- _Partitioning is splitting one (parent) table into smaller (children) tables._

**You will Learn the Basics of Partitioning
**
- Why
- Where
- How


`@script`
Partitioning is the splitting of a table into smaller, children, tables.

In this course, you will learn about why partitioning is used, on which type of tables will you find it, and how to use it to optimize analytic queries.


---
## Why and Where to Use Partitioning

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "7f208bf25e"
```

`@part1`
**Why DBAs Use Partitions** {{1}}
- Improve bulk load and delete performance {{1}}
- Grants storage flexibility {{1}}

**Why Analysts Use Partitions**{{1}}
- Query Performance {{1}}

**Where is Partitioning Used?** {{2}}
- Large Tables {{2}}
- Commonly used filtering columns {{2}}


`@script`
Database Administrators may opt to utilize partitions for a variety of reasons.
- For instance, adding or deleting a partition can speed bulk loads and deletes that would otherwise operate on an entire table.
- Children tables can be stored on different servers and seldom used partitions can be moved to cheaper, slower storage options.
 
Analysts and data scientists can then utilize these partitions to improve their query performance. Referencing a partition allows the query to search a subset of data,speeding the process.

It is important to note partitioning requires resources so is not used on every table. Large tables with a common filter condition, such as a date or location column, provide good use cases.


---
## Referencing Partitions in a Query

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "846a4eda1c"
```

`@part1`
**Date Partition** {{1}}
```sql
select customer_id
, order_id
, order_date
, product_quantity
from customer_orders
where order_date > ‘2018-01-01’ 
``` {{1}}

**Location Partition** {{2}}
```sql
select o.customer_id
, o.order_id
, o.order_date
, o.product_quantity
from customer_orders o
left outer join customer_info i 
   on o.customer_id = i.id
   and i.billing_statecode = 2
where o.order_date > ‘2018-01-01’ 

``` {{2}}


`@script`
Let's use some transaction orders data to see how to add partitions to some sample queries.
 

Partitions are commonly built on a date field that is frequently referenced in a query's where condition. 
This first example shows a customer orders table that is split into many children tables using the order date as the partition column. Perhaps each year constitutes a partition so that all orders in 2018 are stored in one partition, or child table. 

Because the query references the order date in the where clause, only the child table with order dates greater than January 2018 will be searched when the query runs. The partition has effectively limited the search realm, thus speeding the performance.


A location field is another good candidate for a partition, and this second example uses billing statecode as the partitioned column. Perhaps each state code constitutes a partition so that all customer information for one state, say Alaska, is stored in one partition, or child table.

The billing statecode is referenced in the join condition, demonstrating the second method of utilizing partitions in a query. The statecode acts as a filter, joining only the customer information child table with a billing statecode of 2 to the customer orders table.
This query also utilizes the date partition demonstrated in the first example, meaning only the child table with order dates greater than Jan 2018 are searched when referencing the customer orders table.
Both of these conditions together greatly limit the data being searched, thus improving the performance of the query and limiting the load on the database.


---
## Let's Practice!

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "820f23c54e"
```

`@script`
Now it's your turn to practice what you have learned by using partition fields. I will see you back here soon.

